# ade-cli-getting-started

The prereq.sh script is designed to make it easier for anyone using the Azure CLI on Linux to enable Azure Disk Encryption (ADE) on Azure VM's by demonstrating how to automate the creation of the necessary prerequisites.

## Operating environment
* Bash (tested on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS) 
* [Install Azure CLI 2.0](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli?view=azure-cli-latest)]
* [Install jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/)

## Important notes
Be aware this script will create resources in your current default subscription.  To avoid polluting the wrong subscription with these resources, it is suggested to quickly check and make sure the correct subscription is being used:

```bash
az account show
```
For tight control over how and where each disk encryption prerequisite will be created, several parameters are available.  A detailed description of each parameter is available using the help option:
```bash
./prereq.sh --help 
```

## Quick Start

If you'd like the script to create prerequisites within a specific location (matching an existing VM in westus2 for example):
```bash
./prereq.sh --ade-location westus2
```

If you don't mind the script selecting an arbitrary location, no parameters are required:
```bash
./prereq.sh
```

Once the script completes, it will output the names and identifiers of each resource that it has created.  It logs these values to a file in a uniquely named subdirectory for future reference.  To restore these values as environment variables, navigate into that directory and run the following command:
```bash
source ./ade_env.sh 
```
The prerequisite environment variables (all starting with the prefix ADE) are now available for use in bash.  Various disk encryption scenarios can be experimented with. 

### Create a VM 
One thing the script does not do for you is create a test VM to be encrypted.  To continue with the below scenario, first create a VM from a stock gallery image corresonding to a supported Windows operating system or [Linux distribution](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/security/azure-security-disk-encryption-faq#what-linux-distributions-does-azure-disk-encryption-support). The VM must reside in the same regional location as the Key Vault ($ADE_LOCATION) and optionally, within the same resource group ($ADE_RG_NAME).  

If you'd like, save the name of this VM into the following environment variable:
```bash
ADE_VM_NAME=your-new-vm-name-here
```

### Enabling Encryption Without AAD

The prerequisite steps for enabling encryption without AAD credentials involves two steps.  First, creating key vault prerequisites.  Second, authorizing the platform host to retrieve the key from this customer managed key vault during disk encryption scenarios.  When enabling encryption without AAD, only key vault resources need to be set up.  

Key vault resources are created within a specific resource group.  Deleting the resource group will delete the key vault resources.  


### Enabling Encryption With AAD 

To enable encryption with Azure Active Directory (AAD) parameters, an AAD application ID and either a client secret (password string), or an X509 certificate corresponding to that application must be provided to the VM so that it can use this application to authenticate to key vault.  The enable disk encryption commands will accept either authentication option.

The prerequisite script, when used with the --aad option will generate one of each to make it easy to experiment with either scenario.  At the time of enabling disk encryption, you will specify only one of these options.  

When deleting created AD resources later, be aware that AD is implemented as a global service and the AD application itself does not reside within a resource group container.  Deleting resource groups will not delete the AD application.  AD resources must be deleted separately. 

Here are are some further details explaining the differences between using client secrets and client certificates and the steps needed to use them once generated by this script:

### Client Secret 

The client secret is a password in string format that is stored in the log subfolder and that can also be made available as an environment variable. On throwaway test resources used for short lived demonstrations or experimentation, this risk may be acceptable.  In a production environment, this may not be acceptable.  Tight control over the creation, storage, and future access to this secret is warranted.

To enable encryption using client secret, see the documentation for [az vm encryption enable](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/vm/encryption?view=azure-cli-latest).

### Client Certificates 
As an alternative to using a client secret, this script demonstrates creating a self-signed certificate within keyvault that can be deployed to the VM.  The virtue of this technique is that the private key in the certificate is never handled by the administrator running the script and is not stored on the administrative console.  It is transferred from key vault to the VM, and is only referred to by its thumbprint within the administrative console. 

To enable encryption with AAD credentials on remote VM's using certificates instead of client secrets, there are two main steps.

**First**, add the self-signed certificate that lives in keyvault to the VM that you are targeting.  To do this, refer to the documentation for [az vm secret] (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/vm/secret?view=azure-cli-latest#az-vm-secret-add)

**Second**, now that the certificate resides on the VM, disk encryption can be started in a way that only requires passing the thumbprint of that certificate (no secrets involved) as documented in the [az vm encryption enable](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/vm/encryption?view=azure-cli-latest) command.

# More information
* [Azure Disk Encryption for Windows and Linux IaaS VMs](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/documentation/articles/azure-security-disk-encryption/)
* [Powershell Azure Disk Encryption Prerequisite Setup](https://github.com/Azure/azure-powershell/blob/dev/src/ResourceManager/Compute/Commands.Compute/Extension/AzureDiskEncryption/Scripts/AzureDiskEncryptionPreRequisiteSetup.ps1)
